# 元组

元组长度固定：一旦声明，其长度不会增大或缩小。

我们使用包含在圆括号中的逗号分隔的值列表来创建一个元组。元组中的每一个位置都有一个类型，而且这些不同值的类型也不必是相同的。

```rust
 main() {
    let tup:(i32,f64,u8) = (500,6.4,1);

    let (x,y,z) = tup;

    println!("The value of y is:{}",y);
    println!("The value of y is:{}",tup.1);
}
```

# 数组类型

另一个包含多个值的方式是 数组（array）。与元组不同，数组中的每个元素的类型必须相同。Rust 中的数组与一些其他语言中的数组不同，因为 Rust 中的数组是固定长度的：一旦声明，它们的长度不能增长或缩小。

```rust
fn main() {
    let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
    let a: [i32; 5] = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
    let a = [3; 5];
}
```

# 所有权

The ownership of a variable follows the same pattern every time: assigning a value to another variable moves it. When a variable that includes data on the heap goes out of scope, the value will be cleaned up by drop unless ownership of the data has been moved to another variable.

move copy drop borr

# crate

binary crate: src/main.rs

library create: src/lib.rs

# 模块

https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch07-02-defining-modules-to-control-scope-and-privacy.html

# 错误处理

```rust
enum Result<T, E> {
    Ok(T),
    Err(E),
}
```

The T and E are generic type parameters: we’ll discuss generics in more detail in Chapter 10. What you need to know right now is that T represents the type of the value that will be returned in a success case within the Ok variant, and E represents the type of the error that will be returned in a failure case within the Err variant. Because Result has these generic type parameters, we can use the Result type and the functions defined on it in many different situations where the successful value and error value we want to return may differ.

# 生命周期

The compiler uses three rules to figure out the lifetimes of the references when there aren’t explicit annotations. The first rule applies to input lifetimes, and the second and third rules apply to output lifetimes. If the compiler gets to the end of the three rules and there are still references for which it can’t figure out lifetimes, the compiler will stop with an error. These rules apply to fn definitions as well as impl blocks.

The first rule is that the compiler assigns a lifetime parameter to each parameter that’s a reference. In other words, a function with one parameter gets one lifetime parameter: fn foo<'a>(x: &'a i32); a function with two parameters gets two separate lifetime parameters: 

```rust
fn foo<'a, 'b>(x: &'a i32, y: &'b i32); and so on.
```

The second rule is that, if there is exactly one input lifetime parameter, that lifetime is assigned to all output lifetime parameters:

```rust
fn foo<'a>(x: &'a i32) -> &'a i32.
```

The third rule is that, if there are multiple input lifetime parameters, but one of them is &self or &mut self because this is a method, the lifetime of self is assigned to all output lifetime parameters. This third rule makes methods much nicer to read and write because fewer symbols are necessary.

Let’s pretend we’re the compiler. We’ll apply these rules to figure out the lifetimes of the references in the signature of the first_word function in Listing 10-25. The signature starts without any lifetimes associated with the references:
```rust
fn first_word(s: &str) -> &str {
```
Then the compiler applies the first rule, which specifies that each parameter gets its own lifetime. We’ll call it 'a as usual, so now the signature is this:

```rust
fn first_word<'a>(s: &'a str) -> &str {
```

The second rule applies because there is exactly one input lifetime. The second rule specifies that the lifetime of the one input parameter gets assigned to the output lifetime, so the signature is now this:

```rust
fn first_word<'a>(s: &'a str) -> &'a str {
```

Now all the references in this function signature have lifetimes, and the compiler can continue its analysis without needing the programmer to annotate the lifetimes in this function signature.

Let’s look at another example, this time using the longest function that had no lifetime parameters when we started working with it in Listing 10-20:

```rust
fn longest(x: &str, y: &str) -> &str {
```

Let’s apply the first rule: each parameter gets its own lifetime. This time we have two parameters instead of one, so we have two lifetimes:
```rust
fn longest<'a, 'b>(x: &'a str, y: &'b str) -> &str {
```
You can see that the second rule doesn’t apply because there is more than one input lifetime. The third rule doesn’t apply either, because longest is a function rather than a method, so none of the parameters are self. After working through all three rules, we still haven’t figured out what the return type’s lifetime is. This is why we got an error trying to compile the code in Listing 10-20: the compiler worked through the lifetime elision rules but still couldn’t figure out all the lifetimes of the references in the signature.

Because the third rule really only applies in method signatures, we’ll look at lifetimes in that context next to see why the third rule means we don’t have to annotate lifetimes in method signatures very often.

# 范型，trait语法

```rust
use std::fmt::Display;

fn longest_with_an_announcement<'a, T>(
    x: &'a str,
    y: &'a str,
    ann: T,
) -> &'a str
where
    T: Display,
{
    println!("Announcement! {}", ann);
    if x.len() > y.len() {
        x
    } else {
        y
    }
}
```

# 闭包

The way a closure captures and handles values from the environment affects which traits the closure implements, and traits are how functions and structs can specify what kinds of closures they can use. Closures will automatically implement one, two, or all three of these Fn traits, in an additive fashion, depending on how the closure’s body handles the values:

- FnOnce applies to closures that can be called once. All closures implement at least this trait, because all closures can be called. A closure that moves captured values out of its body will only implement FnOnce and none of the other Fn traits, because it can only be called once.
- FnMut applies to closures that don’t move captured values out of their body, but that might mutate the captured values. These closures can be called more than once.
- Fn applies to closures that don’t move captured values out of their body and that don’t mutate captured values, as well as closures that capture nothing from their environment. These closures can be called more than once without mutating their environment, which is important in cases such as calling a closure multiple times concurrently.

# iterator

The Iterator trait has a number of different methods with default implementations provided by the standard library; you can find out about these methods by looking in the standard library API documentation for the Iterator trait. Some of these methods call the next method in their definition, which is why you’re required to implement the next method when implementing the Iterator trait.

Methods that call next are called ==consuming adaptors==, because calling them uses up the iterator.

==Iterator adaptors== are methods defined on the Iterator trait that don’t consume the iterator. Instead, they produce different iterators by changing some aspect of the original iterator.

# rust代码管理

workspace 管理 package ， package 管理 crate 。crate分为 bin 和lib

we create the Cargo.toml file that will configure the entire workspace. This file won’t have a [package] section. Instead, it will start with a [workspace] section that will allow us to add members to the workspace by specifying the path to the package with our binary crate; in this case, that path is adder:


https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch14-03-cargo-workspaces.html

# 智能指针

### Using a Box<T> to Store Data on the Heap

- Box<T>

Boxes allow you to store data on the ==heap== rather than the stack. What remains on the stack is the pointer to the heap data.

The Box<T> type is a smart pointer because it implements the ==Deref== trait, which allows Box<T> values to be treated like references. When a Box<T> value goes out of scope, the heap data that the box is pointing to is cleaned up as well because of the ==Drop== trait implementation

- Rc<T>、Arc<T>

Fortunately, Arc<T> is a type like Rc<T> that is safe to use in concurrent situations. The a stands for atomic, meaning it’s an atomically reference counted type

You have to enable multiple ownership explicitly by using the Rust type Rc<T>, which is an abbreviation for reference counting. The Rc<T> type keeps track of the number of references to a value to determine whether or not the value is still in use. If there are zero references to a value, the value can be cleaned up without any references becoming invalid.

Imagine Rc<T> as a TV in a family room. When one person enters to watch TV, they turn it on. Others can come into the room and watch the TV. When the last person leaves the room, they turn off the TV because it’s no longer being used. If someone turns off the TV while others are still watching it, there would be uproar from the remaining TV watchers!

We use the Rc<T> type when we want to ==allocate some data on the heap== for multiple parts of our program to read and we can’t determine at compile time which part will finish using the data last.

- RefCell<T>

Here is a recap of the reasons to choose Box<T>, Rc<T>, or RefCell<T>:

- Rc<T> enables multiple owners of the same data; Box<T> and RefCell<T> have single owners.
- Box<T> allows immutable or mutable borrows checked at compile time; Rc<T> allows only immutable borrows checked at compile time; RefCell<T> allows immutable or mutable borrows checked at runtime.
- Because RefCell<T> allows mutable borrows checked at runtime, you can mutate the value inside the RefCell<T> even when the RefCell<T> is immutable.


A common way to use RefCell<T> is in combination with Rc<T>. Recall that Rc<T> lets you have multiple owners of some data, but it only gives immutable access to that data. If you have an Rc<T> that holds a RefCell<T>, you can get a value that can have multiple owners and that you can mutate!

- Weak<T>

# 多线程

To create a new thread, we call the ==thread::spawn== function and pass it a closure (we talked about closures in Chapter 13) containing the code we want to run in the new thread.

- thread::spawn
- mpsc:channel
- Mutex<T>
As you might suspect, Mutex<T> is a smart pointer. More accurately, the call to lock returns a smart pointer called MutexGuard, wrapped in a LockResult that we handled with the call to unwrap. The MutexGuard smart pointer implements Deref to point at our inner data; the smart pointer also has a Drop implementation that releases the lock automatically when a MutexGuard goes out of scope, which happens at the end of the inner scope. As a result, we don’t risk forgetting to release the lock and blocking the mutex from being used by other threads, because the lock release happens automatically.

two concurrency concepts are embedded in the language: the std::marker traits Sync and Send.

The Send marker trait indicates that ownership of values of the type implementing Send can be transferred between threads. Almost every Rust type is Send, but there are some exceptions, including Rc<T>

The Sync marker trait indicates that it is safe for the type implementing Sync to be referenced from multiple threads.

# 面向对象state pattern

```rust
trait State {
    fn request_review(self:Box<Self>)-> Box<dyn State>;
    fn approve(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State>;
    fn content<'a>(&self, post:&'a Post)->&'a str{
        return "";
    }
}

struct Draft{}

impl State for Draft {
    fn request_review(self:Box<Self>)-> Box<dyn State> {
        Box::new(PendingReview{})
    }

    fn approve(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State>{
        self
    }
}

struct PendingReview{

}

impl State for PendingReview {
    fn request_review(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State> {
        self
    }

    fn approve(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State>{
        Box::new(Published{})
    }
}

struct Published{

}

impl State for Published {
    fn request_review(self:Box<Self>)-> Box<dyn State>{
        self
    }
    
    fn approve(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State>{
        self
    }

    fn content<'a>(&self, post:&'a Post)->&'a str{
        &post.content
    }
}

pub struct Post{
    state:Option<Box<dyn State>>,
    content:String,
}

impl Post {
    pub fn new()->Self{
        Post { 
            state: Some(Box::new(Draft{})),
            content:String::new(),
        }
    }

    pub fn add_text(&mut self,text:&str){
        self.content.push_str(text);
    }

    pub fn content(&self)->&str{
        self.state.as_ref().unwrap().content(self)
    }

    pub fn request_review(&mut self){
        if let Some(s) = self.state.take(){
            self.state = Some(s.request_review())
        }
    }

    pub fn approve(&mut self){
        if let Some(s) = self.state.take(){
            self.state = Some(s.approve())
        }
    }
}
```